This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. Consider serotonin liked.