This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. This book has a short history and a long history. We’ll begin with
the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On
Quora, anyone can ask a question, of any sort—and anyone can answer.
Readers upvote those answers they like, and downvote those they don’t.
In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others
sink into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all
nature. The discussion was often compelling, and it was interesting to
see the diverse range of opinions generated by the same question.
When I was taking a break (or avoiding work), I often turned to
Quora, looking for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as “What’s the difference between being
happy and being content?”, “What things get better as you age?” and
“What makes life more meaningful?”
Quora tells you how many people have viewed your answer and
how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach,
and see what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those
who view an answer upvote it. As of July 2017, as I write this—and five
years after I addressed “What makes life more meaningful?”—my
answer to that question has received a relatively small audience (14,000
views, and 133 upvotes), while my response to the question about aging
has been viewed by 7,200 people and received 36 upvotes. Not exactly
home runs. However, it’s to be expected. On such sites, most answers
receive very little attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular.
Soon after, I answered another question: “What are the most valuable things everyone should know?” I wrote a list of rules, or maxims;
some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek—“Be grateful in spite of
your suffering,” “Do not do things that you hate,” “Do not hide things
in the fog,” and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with this
list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as “I’m
definitely printing this list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply
phenomenal,” and “You win Quora. We can just close the site now.”
Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me
and told me how much they liked it. As of May 2017, my answer to
“What are the most valuable things . . .” has been viewed by a hundred and twenty thousand people and been upvoted twenty-three
hundred times. Only a few hundred of the roughly six hundred thousand questions on Quora have cracked the two-thousand-upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a
99.9 percentile answer.
It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living
that it was going to perform so well. I had put a fair bit of care into
all the sixty or so answers I submitted in the few months surrounding
that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest.
The respondents are anonymous. They’re disinterested, in the best
sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased. So, I paid attention to the results, and thought about the reasons for that answer’s
disproportionate success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between
the familiar and the unfamiliar while formulating the rules. Perhaps
people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply. Perhaps
people just like lists.
A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during
a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness, where I had criticized the idea
that happiness was the proper goal for life. Over the previous decades
I had read more than my share of dark books about the twentieth century, focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave-labourcamp horrors of the latter, once wrote that the “pitiful ideology” holding that “human beings are created for happiness” was an ideology
“done in by the first blow of the work assigner’s cudgel.”1
 In a crisis,
the inevitable suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of
the idea that happiness is the proper pursuit of the individual. On the
radio show, I suggested, instead, that a deeper meaning was required.
I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly re-presented
in the great stories of the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with happiness. This is part
of the long history of the present work.
From 1985 until 1999 I worked for about three hours a day on the
only other book I have ever published: Maps of Meaning: The Architecture of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a
course on the material in that book, first at Harvard, and now at the
University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube, and
because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a
Canadian public TV station, I decided to film my university and public
lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly large
audience—more than a million views by April 2016. The number of
views has risen very dramatically since then (up to eighteen million as
I write this), but that is in part because I became embroiled in a political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention.
That’s another story. Maybe even another book.
I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious
stories of the past, particularly those derived from an earlier, oral
tradition, were moral in their intent, rather than descriptive. Thus,
they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested
that our ancestors portrayed the world as a stage—a drama—instead
of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and
not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to wellunderstood social norms, and remain predictable and cooperative. It’s
the world of social structure, explored territory, and familiarity. The
state of Order is typically portrayed, symbolically—imaginatively—as
masculine. It’s the Wise King and the Tyrant, forever bound together,
as society is simultaneously structure and oppression.
Chaos, by contrast, is where—or when—something unexpected
happens. Chaos emerges, in trivial form, when you tell a joke at a
party with people you think you know and a silent and embarrassing
chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you suddenly find yourself without employment, or are
betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of symbolically masculine order,
it’s presented imaginatively as feminine. It’s the new and unpredictable suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It’s
Creation and Destruction, the source of new things and the destination of the dead (as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise).
Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol:
two serpents, head to tail.* Order is the white, masculine serpent;
Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white—
and the white in the black—indicate the possibility of transformation:
just when things seem secure, the unknown can loom, unexpectedly
and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can
emerge from catastrophe and chaos.
For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the
ever-entwined pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life,
the divine Way.
And that’s much better than happiness.
The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast
where I discussed such issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I
found that the spirit was neither in me during that attempt nor in the
resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my
former self, and my previous book, instead of occupying the place
between order and chaos and producing something new. I suggested
that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program
called Big Ideas on my YouTube channel. I thought if she did that we
could have a more informed and thorough discussion about what kind
of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book.
She contacted me a few weeks later, after watching all four lectures
and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened, as had her commitment to the project. That was promising—and unexpected. I’m always surprised when people respond
positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature.
I’m amazed I have been allowed (even encouraged) to teach what I
taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I’ve always thought that if
people really noticed what I was teaching there would be Hell to pay.
You can decide for yourself what truth there might be in that concern
after reading this book. :)
She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
“to live well”—whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about
my Quora list. I had in the meantime written some further thoughts
about of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas, as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might
be a nice fit between the Quora list and my new agent’s ideas. So, I
sent her the list. She liked it.
At about the same time, a friend and former student of mine, the
novelist and screenwriter Gregg Hurwitz, was considering a new
book, which would become the bestselling thriller Orphan X. He liked
the rules, too. He had Mia, the book’s female lead, post a selection of
them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed
apropos. That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested to my agent that I write a brief
chapter on each of the rules. She agreed, so I wrote a book proposal suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren’t at all brief. I had much more to say about each rule
than I originally envisioned.
This was partly because I had spent a very long time researching
my first book: studying history, mythology, neuroscience, psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read
and perhaps even understood much of Milton’s Paradise Lost, Goethe’s
Faust and Dante’s Inferno. I integrated all of that, for better or worse,
trying to address a perplexing problem: the reason or reasons for the
nuclear standoff of the Cold War. I couldn’t understand how belief
systems could be so important to people that they were willing to risk
the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another—and
that the systems weren’t just about belief.
People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another. They act in keeping with each other’s expectations
and desires. They can cooperate. They can even compete peacefully,
because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared
belief system, partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone—in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others. Shared beliefs simplify the world, as well, because people who know what to expect from
one another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps
nothing more important than the maintenance of this organization—
this simplification. If it’s threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn’t precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They
will fight, instead, to maintain the match between what they believe,
what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is
precisely the maintenance of that match that enables everyone to live
together peacefully, predictably and productively. It reduces uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty
inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social
contract obtaining between the two has been violated. Actions speak
louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by terrible emotions: disgust,
contempt (for self and traitor), guilt, anxiety, rage and dread. Conflict
is inevitable, sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems—
shared systems of agreed-upon conduct and expectation—regulate
and control all those powerful forces. It’s no wonder that people will
fight to protect something that saves them from being possessed by
emotions of chaos and terror (and after that from degeneration into
strife and combat).
There’s more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value—a hierarchy of value, where
some things are given priority and importance and others are not. In
the absence of such a system of value, people simply cannot act. In fact,
they can’t even perceive, because both action and perception require
a goal, and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in relation to goals. We are not
happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing—and
the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the
meaning of life without positive value is not simply neutral. Because
we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an integral part of
human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering
that is intrinsic to Being.* We must have the meaning inherent in a
profound system of value or the horror of existence rapidly becomes
paramount. Then, nihilism beckons, with its hopelessness and despair.
So: no value, no meaning. Between value systems, however, there
is the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the most diamantine rock and the hardest of places: loss of group-centred
belief renders life chaotic, miserable, intolerable; presence of groupcentred belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable. In the West,
we have been withdrawing from our tradition-, religion- and even
nation-centred cultures, partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all.
While writing Maps of Meaning, I was (also) driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict—certainly not on the scale
of the world conflagrations of the twentieth century. Our technologies
of destruction have become too powerful. The potential consequences
of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our
systems of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this
apparently intractable problem for months. Was there a third way,
invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier, many stories above the
ground, directly under the dome of a massive cathedral. The people
on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall—and even the peak of the dome itself.
I have learned to pay attention to dreams, not least because of
my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the dim
places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too (more than other religious traditions, although I am
always trying to redress this lack). Like others, therefore, I must and
do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew
that cathedrals were constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the
point under the dome was the centre of the cross. I knew that the
cross was simultaneously, the point of greatest suffering, the point of
death and transformation, and the symbolic centre of the world. That
was not somewhere I wanted to be. I managed to get down, out of the
heights—out of the symbolic sky—back to safe, familiar, anonymous
ground. I don’t know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my
bedroom and my bed and tried to return to sleep and the peace of
unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral, to place me once again at that central point. There
was no escape. It was a true nightmare. I forced myself awake. The
curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep, I
looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook
myself completely awake and they disappeared.
My dream placed me at the centre of Being itself, and there was
no escape. It took me months to understand what this meant. During
this time, I came to a more complete, personal realization of what the
great stories of the past continually insist upon: the centre is occupied
by the individual. The centre is marked by the cross, as X marks the
spot. Existence at that cross is suffering and transformation—and that
fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted. It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines and, simultaneously, to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is
possible, instead, to find sufficient meaning in individual consciousness and experience.
How could the world be freed from the terrible dilemma of conflict, on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution, on the
other? The answer was this: through the elevation and development
of the individual, and through the willingness of everyone to shoulder
the burden of Being and to take the heroic path. We must each adopt
as much responsibility as possible for individual life, society and the
world. We must each tell the truth and repair what is in disrepair and
break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this manner
that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It’s
asking a lot. It’s asking for everything. But the alternative—the horror
of authoritarian belief, the chaos of the collapsed state, the tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world, the existential angst and weakness of the purposeless individual—is clearly worse.
I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for decades.
I have built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to
them. I am not for a moment claiming, however, that I am entirely
correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don’t have the whole story. I’m simply
offering the best I can manage. In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and
thinking was the new essays which eventually became this book. My
initial idea was to write a short essay on all forty of the answers I had
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random
House Canada. While writing, however, I cut the essay number to
twenty-five and then to sixteen and then finally, to the current twelve.
I’ve been editing that remainder, with the help and care of my official
editor (and with the vicious and horribly accurate criticism of Hurwitz,
mentioned previously) for the past three years.
It took a long time to settle on a title: 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote
to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others? First and foremost,
because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values—alone and together. We’re pack animals, beasts of
burden. We must bear a load, to justify our miserable existence. We
require routine and tradition. That’s order. Order can become excessive, and that’s not good, but chaos can swamp us, so we drown—
and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and narrow
path. Each of the twelve rules of this book—and their accompanying
essays—therefore provide a guide to being there. “There” is the dividing line between order and chaos. That’s where we are simultaneously
stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing
enough, and cooperating enough. It’s there we find the meaning that
justifies life and its inevitable suffering. Perhaps, if we lived properly,
we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps, if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our
own fragility and mortality, without the sense of aggrieved victimhood
that produces, first, resentment, then envy, and then the desire for
vengeance and destruction. Perhaps, if we lived properly, we wouldn’t
have to turn to totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the
knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance. Perhaps we could
come to avoid those pathways to Hell—and we have seen in the terrible
twentieth century just how real Hell can be.
I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help
people understand what they already know: that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism of genuine Being, and
that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the
decision to live a meaningful life.
If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all, as you proceed through these pages.
?If you are like most people, you don’t often think about lobsters2—
unless you’re eating one. However, these interesting and delicious
crustaceans are very much worth considering. Their nervous system
is comparatively simple, with large, easily observable neurons, the
magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to
map the neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped
us understand the structure and function of the brain and behaviour
of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have
more in common with you than you might think (particularly when
you are feeling crabby—ha ha).
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down
there, a range within which they hunt for prey and scavenge around
for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere
secure, where the hunting and the gathering is good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters. What
if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean,
at the same time, and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living and raise a family, in the
same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come
north in the spring, for example, they engage in ferocious territorial
disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to human
ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical
bird is a small warrior proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren,
for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird common in North
America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest,
away from the wind and rain. He wants it close to food, and attractive
to potential mates. He also wants to convince competitors for that
space to keep their distance. My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years
old. It looked like a Conestoga wagon, and had a front entrance about
the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens, who are tiny,
and not so good for other, larger birds, who couldn’t get in. My elderly
neighbour had a birdhouse, too, which we built for her at the same time,
from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large enough for a bird the
size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our birdhouse, and made himself at home
there. We could hear his lengthy, trilling song, repeated over and over,
during the early spring. Once he’d built his nest in the covered wagon,
however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our
neighbour’s nearby boot. He packed it so full that no other bird, large
or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not pleased by this
pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. “If we
take it down,” said my dad, “clean it up, and put it back in the tree, the
wren will just pack it full of sticks again.” Wrens are small, and they’re
cute, but they’re merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous winter—first time down
the hill—and had received some money from a school insurance policy
designed to reward unfortunate, clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder (a high-tech novelty at the time) with the proceeds. My
dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren’s song, play
it back, and watch what happened. So, I went out into the bright spring
sunlight and taped a few minutes of the wren laying furious claim to
his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice. That little
bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my
cassette recorder, swooping back and forth, inches from the speaker.
We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour, even in the absence of the tape
recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of the trees
near our birdhouse there was a good chance he would get knocked
off his perch by a kamikaze wren.
Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly,
sing or perch in trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens
can’t breathe underwater, and are seldom served with butter. However,
they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status
and position, for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian
zoologist and comparative psychologist Thorlief Schjelderup-Ebbe
observed (back in 1921) that even common barnyard chickens establish a “pecking order.”3
The determination of Who’s Who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual bird’s survival, particularly in
times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to whatever
food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them come the second-stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn, and so on, down
to the bedraggled, partially-feathered and badly-pecked wretches who
occupy the lowest, untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy.
Chickens, like suburbanites, live communally. Songbirds, such as
wrens, do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It’s just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest and
most fortunate birds occupy prime territory, and defend it. Because of
this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates, and to hatch chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain and predators, as well as easy access to superior food, makes for a much less
stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little difference
between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life
and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighbourhood of
well-stratified songbirds, it is the least dominant and most stressed
birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world, who are most likely
to sicken and die.4 This is equally true of human neighbourhoods,
when bird flu viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet. The
poor and stressed always die first, and in greater numbers. They are
also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases, such as cancer,
diabetes and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it
is said, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always
in short supply, territory-seeking among animals produces conflict.
Conflict, in turn, produces another problem: how to win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point
is particularly important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble
about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can easily degenerate
into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird,
usually the largest, will eventually win—but even the victor may be
hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an undamaged, canny
bystander, can move in, opportunistically, and defeat the now-crippled
victor. That is not at all a good deal for the first two birds. Over the millennia, animals who must co-habit with others in the
same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish
dominance, while risking the least amount of possible damage. A
defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back, exposing its throat
to the victors, who will not then deign to tear it out. The now-dominant wolf may still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one
as pathetic as his now-defeated foe. Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized
sound pulses while hunting and during other times of high excitement
to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate group
members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things.
Lobsters, scuttling around on the ocean floor, are no exception.5
If you catch a few dozen, and transport them to a new location, you
can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster
will first begin to explore the new territory, partly to map its details,
and partly to find a good place for shelter. Lobsters learn a lot about
where they live, and they remember what they learn. If you startle one
near its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it
some distance away, however, it will immediately dart towards the
nearest suitable shelter, previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and
the forces of nature. Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they moult, or
shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable for extended
periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home,
particularly if it is located where shells and other detritus can be
dragged into place to cover the entrance, once the lobster is snugly
placed inside. However, there may be only a small number of highquality shelters or hiding places in each new territory. They are scarce
and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out
exploring. Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised
in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.6
 It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviours built right into its nervous
system. It begins to dance around, like a boxer, opening and raising
its claws, moving backward, forward, and side to side, mirroring its
opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time,
it employs special jets under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its
opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that tell the
other lobster about its size, sex, health, and mood.
Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately from the display of
claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent, and will back down without a fight. The chemical information exchanged in the spray can
have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less aggressive lobster
to retreat. That’s dispute resolution Level 1.7
 If the two lobsters are
very close in size and apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of
liquid has been insufficiently informative, they will proceed to dispute
resolution Level 2. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded
downward, one will advance, and the other retreat. Then the defender
will advance, and the aggressor retreat. After a couple of rounds of this
behaviour, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards, and vanish, to try his luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however,
the lobsters move to Level 3, which involves genuine combat.
This time, the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously,
with their claws extended, to grapple. Each tries to flip the other on
its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude that its opponent
is capable of inflicting serious damage. It generally gives up and leaves
(although it harbours intense resentment and gossips endlessly about
the victor behind its back). If neither can overturn the other—or if one
will not quit despite being flipped—the lobsters move to Level 4.
Doing so involves extreme risk, and is not something to be engaged in
without forethought: one or both lobsters will emerge damaged from
the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other, with increasing speed. Their
claws are open, so they can grab a leg, or antenna, or an eye-stalk, or
anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail-flick backwards, sharply, with
claw clamped firmly shut, and try to tear it off. Disputes that have
escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and loser. The
loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the winner, now a mortal enemy.
In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively
a lobster has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even
against another, previously defeated opponent. A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can
have even more severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves. Then it grows a new, subordinate’s brain—one more appropriate to its new, lowly position.8
 Its
original brain just isn’t sophisticated to manage the transformation
from king to bottom dog without virtually complete dissolution and
regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful transformation after
a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship
with the once successful crustacean. A lobster loser’s brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a
lobster winner. This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a
lobster is confident or cringing depends on the ratio of two chemicals
that modulate communication between lobster neurons: serotonin and
octopamine. Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter.
A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back
down when challenged. This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that it can
look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti Western.
When a lobster that has just lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it
will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight longer
and harder.9
 The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which
are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioural effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even
cheers up lobsters.10
High serotonin/low octopamine characterizes the victor. The
opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of octopamine to
serotonin, produces a defeated-looking, scrunched-up, inhibited,
drooping, skulking sort of lobster, very likely to hang around street
corners, and to vanish at the first hint of trouble. Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail-flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is
necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the soldier
or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder. When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again it
is more likely to lose again than you would predict, statistically, from
a tally of its previous fights. Its victorious opponent, on the other hand,
is more likely to win. It’s winner-take-all in the lobster world, just as
it is in human societies, where the top 1 percent have as much loot as
the bottom 50 percent11—and where the richest eighty-five people have
as much money as the bottom three and a half billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside
the financial domain—indeed, anywhere that creative production is
required. The majority of scientific papers are published by a very
small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces
almost all the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors
sell all the books. A million and a half separately titled books (!) sell
each year in the US. However, only five hundred of these sell more
than a hundred thousand copies.12 Similarly, just four classical composers (Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, and Tchaikovsky) wrote almost all
the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed
so prolifically that it would take decades of work merely to hand-copy
his scores, yet only a small fraction of this prodigious output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other
three members of this group of hyper-dominant composers: only a
small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small fraction
of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers
who have ever composed makes up almost all the classical music that
the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price’s law, after Derek J.
de Solla Price,13 the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963. It can be modelled using an approximately L-shaped
graph, with number of people on the vertical axis, and productivity or
resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier. Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), an Italian polymath, noticed
its applicability to wealth distribution in the early twentieth century,
and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities (a very small
number have almost all the people), the mass of heavenly bodies (a
very small number hoard all the matter), and the frequency of words
in a language (90 percent of communication occurs using just 500
words), among many other things. Sometimes it is known as the
Matthew Principle (Matthew 25:29), derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ: “to those who have everything, more will be given; from those who have nothing, everything
will be taken.”
You truly know you are the Son of God when your dicta apply even
to crustaceans.
Back to the fractious shellfish: it doesn’t take that long before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with and who
should be given a wide berth—and once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs to do, once he
has won, is to wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a
previous opponent will vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker
lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his legs
attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast—occupying the best
shelter, getting some good rest, finishing a good meal—parades his
dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate lobsters from
their shelters at night, just to remind them who’s their daddy. They let the males fight it out and peel their paramours from the top.
This is very much what happens with stock-market pricing, where
the value of any particular enterprise is determined through the competition of all.
When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a
bit, they become interested in mating. They start hanging around
the dominant lobster’s pad, spraying attractive scents and aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made
him successful, so he’s likely to react in a dominant, irritable manner.
Furthermore, he’s large, healthy and powerful. It’s no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. (If properly charmed,
however, he will change his behaviour towards the female. This is the
lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback
of all time, and the eternal Beauty-and-the-Beast plot of the archetypal
romance. This is the pattern of behaviour continually represented in
the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men.)
It should be pointed out, however, that sheer physical power is an
unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch
primatologist Frans de Waal15 has taken pains to demonstrate. Among
the chimp troupes he studied, males who were successful in the longer
term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated
attributes. Even the most brutal chimp despot can be taken down,
after all, by two opponents, each three-quarters as mean. In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal
coalitions with their lower-status compatriots, and who pay careful
attention to the troupe’s females and their infants. The political ploy
of baby-kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still
comparatively primitive, so the bare plot elements of Beast and Beauty
suffice for them.
Once the Beast has been successfully charmed, the successful
female (lobster) will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the
male, now converted into a careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm
into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs around, and hardens up for a couple of weeks (another phenomenon not entirely
unknown among human beings). At her leisure, she returns to her
own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point another female
will attempt the same thing—and so on. The dominant male, with his
upright and confident posture, not only gets the prime real estate and
easiest access to the best hunting grounds. He also gets all the girls.
It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful, if you are a lobster, and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons, apart
from those that are comically obvious. First, we know that lobsters
have been around, in one form or another, for more than 350 million
years.16 This is a very long time. Sixty-five million years ago, there
were still dinosaurs. That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To
the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche, who appeared
and disappeared in the flow of near-eternal time. This means that
dominance hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of
the environment to which all complex life has adapted. A third of a
billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively
simple. Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information about status and society. The
importance of this fact can hardly be overstated. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something
evolves, it must build upon what nature has already produced. New
features may be added, and old features may undergo some alteration,
but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings
of bats, the hands of human beings, and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form. They even have the same number
of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology
long ago.
Now evolution works, in large part, through variation and natural
selection. Variation exists for many reasons, including gene-shuffling
(to put it simply) and random mutation. Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them, across
time. That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual
alteration of life-forms over the eons. But there’s an additional question lurking under the surface: what exactly is the “nature” in “natural
selection”? What exactly is “the environment” to which animals adapt?
We make many assumptions about nature—about the environment—
and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said, “It’s not what
we don’t know that gets us in trouble. It’s what we know for sure that
just ain’t so.”
First, it is easy to assume that “nature” is something with a nature—
something static. But it’s not: at least not in any simple sense. It’s static
and dynamic, at the same time. The environment—the nature that
selects—itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the
Taoists capture this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists—reality itself—
is composed of two opposing principles, often translated as feminine
and masculine, or even more narrowly as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The
Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing twin serpents, head to tail. The
black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white serpent,
order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are
interchangeable, as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so
certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed.
Every revolution produces a new order. Every death is, simultaneously,
a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of
apprehension. Nature “selects.” The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness. It is “fitness” that is “selected.”
Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring (will propagate its genes through time). The “fit”
in “fitness” is therefore the matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static—if
nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging—then evolution
is a never-ending series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated across time. The still-powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the
pinnacle, is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces
the erroneous notion that there is a destination of natural selection
(increasing fitness to the environment), and that it can be conceptualized as a fixed point.
But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector—not in
any simple sense. Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature
varies like a musical score—and that, in part, explains why music
produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species transforms and changes, the features that make a
given individual successful in surviving and reproducing also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit
creatures matching themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a dance with nature,
albeit one that is deadly. “In my kingdom,” as the Red Queen tells
Alice in Wonderland, “you have to run as fast as you can just to stay
in the same place.” No one standing still can triumph, no matter how
well constituted.
Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly (music
frequently models this, too). Leaves change more quickly than trees,
and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate. If it wasn’t this way, then the conservatism of evolution would
not work, as the basic morphology of arms and hands would have to
change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It’s chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order
that is most real is the order that is most unchanging—and that is not
necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when perceived,
might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the
forest. And some things that are most real (such as the ever-present
dominance hierarchy) cannot be “seen” at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically. Rich,
modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine
the environment as something pristine and paradisal, like a French
impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect,
absent the disruptions and depredations of mankind. Unfortunately,
“the environment” is also elephantiasis and guinea worms (don’t ask),
anopheles mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS
and the Black Plague. We don’t fantasize about the beauty of these
aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that
we attempt to modify our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems and growing food and generating
power. If Mother Nature wasn’t so hell-bent on our destruction, it
would be easier for us to exist in simple harmony with her dictates.
And this brings us to a third erroneous concept: that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have
emerged within it. The order within the chaos and order of Being
all the more “natural” the longer it has lasted. This is because
is “what selects,” and the longer a feature has existed the more time
it has had to be selected—and to shape life. It does not matter whether
that feature is physical and biological, or social and cultural. All that
matters, from a Darwinian perspective, is permanence—and the
dominance hierarchy, however social or cultural it might appear, has
been around for some half a billion years. It’s permanent. The
dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It’s not communism, either,
for that matter. It’s not the military-industrial complex. It’s not the
patriarchy—that disposable, malleable, arbitrary cultural artefact.
It’s not even a human creation; not in the most profound sense. It is
instead a near-eternal aspect of the environment, and much of what
is blamed on these more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence
of its unchanging existence. We (the sovereign we, the we that has been
around since the beginning of life) have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long, long time. 